reusing medical supplies and operating
without anesthetics that's the reality
in much of Gaza where the injured are
faced with a health system that
collapsed a long time ago teams of
international doctors who have been able
to enter the strip are shocked by the
number of children they're operating on
and that includes Dr Victoria Rose she
was the only plastic surgeon at the
largest facility in southern Gaza nasd
hospital and saw a steady stream of
children with blast wounds to the face
and limbs well she's just returned to
the UK from Gaza and she's joining us on
the aler NewsHour Dr Victoria Rose
thanks very much for your time with us
um as we're saying you've just returned
you were working at Nasa Hospital uh in
Khan yunes can you speak to what you saw
there and what shocked you the
most I think what shocked me the most
this time was the number of children
that um I saw
and and in fact operated on when I'd
been um at the European Gaza Hospital in
March um it was it was a lot of children
then but now in August I would say that
80% of everyone I treated was under the
age of 16 what sorts of injuries would
you see and what sort of operations
would you be carrying
out um all of the injuries were
explosive
related um and burns that there was no
real other injury apart from explosion
or a burn um so the sorts of things that
I was um mainly treating uh were um sort
of third degree burns 30
40% um I saw a lot of lower limb trauma
children losing legs um losing arms we
had a couple of upper arm amputees a lot
of facial injuries um I had a
seven-year-old that had most of nose
blown off and um a big hole in his lip
um a girl that had lost quite a lot of
her um skin down to the bone on her on
her
forehead um so so what tended to happen
is in the explosions the children would
either get burnt or shrapnel or or
um part of the building that had
crumbled would be would be weaponized
and held at them and then inflict a sort
of soft tissue wound with or without an
under dying bony injury have you ever
seen anything like
this no
never how are the children coping in
their
families uh various ways I mean the
whole Spectrum we had a few children
that refused to speak to us or engage
with us or really with any of their
family um and then some some children
who who sort of you know managed to uh
cope with their injuries and and sort of
were really conducive to treatment and
and seemed to be able to get by but it
was it was a real mixed bag um a lot a
lot of the children are so young I don't
think they understand the significance
of some of the injuries that they've
sustained there have been several
attacks near hospitals throughout this
war or even on a field Hospital in
central Gaza that took place on July the
27th many children there among the Dead
the doctors and the nurses and all your
colleagues on the ground will have to be
making some tough decisions as to who to
try to save considering the lack of
space the lack of anesthetics the lack
of supplies and the list goes on and on
I mean how how difficult were these
decisions to
make I think we were making sort of
decisions that we wouldn't make if the
children were in the UK um you know
there's a lot of situations where we
amputated because you know we didn't
have the ability to do the
reconstruction and we knew that if we
didn't do the amputation the risk of
infection and then death from sepsis was
a possibility um so things like that
were were fairly uncomfortable to do um
there there was a a real sort of portive
Specialties um so we didn't have um an
ENT surgeon or a maxilla facial surgeon
I was the only plastic surgeon in Gaza
for the month uh there hadn't been a
plastic surgeon in Gaza or at the NASA
hospital since May when I arrived so
there was quite a number of people who
had sort of been waiting for somebody
that could do plastic surgery um and
obviously you know if you've waited a
couple of months the wounds are heavily
infected um a lot of the patients are
malnourished so a lot of the procedures
uh that I was attempted to do would
either get infected or have to be
delayed until the wounds were
cleaner okay we'll have to leave it
there Dr Victoria Rose we thank you so
much for speaking to us from the
UK thank you very
much make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from alaz